# June 15th, 2023

### What I'm working on:

Today, I'm working on the `RegionFile` construct in [`world::io::region::regionfile`](https://github.com/NullSurplus/mcutil/blob/main/src/world/io/region/regionfile.rs).

Since this is my first journal entry for this project, I think it's a good idea to get everyone a little up to date on how things work (as of writing; when you're reading this things may work differently).

##### Region File Format

Do you have any permanent web browser tabs? Tabs that you keep open, regardless of what you're doing? Well, let me introduce you to one of my permanent tabs: [Region file format](https://minecraft.fandom.com/wiki/Region_file_format) (Refer to the information on this page to understand the content in this entry)

##### `SectorManager`

The `SectorManager` is a struct that I use to manage the arrangement of empty sectors in a region file. This allows for the Region File to free up sections during reallocation of chunks, and then it can later use those freed up sections. But there's a problem with my strategy. I'll give you a chance to see if you can [spot the issue](https://github.com/NullSurplus/mcutil/blob/6e7648f2f363186b43014d3c580020c8e74c690a/src/world/io/region/sectormanager.rs#L35) (Don't cheat by reading the comments). In case you were unable to determine the issue, or maybe you didn't want to read my code, or whatever, I'll explain the issue as plainly as I can.

###### The Issue

Let's say you already have a Region File ready to go. One that was birthed by Minecraft itself. This region file has all 1024 chunks present, and each chunk exists in a single 4KiB block. You decide that you want to modify one of these chunks, so you pluck it from the file, make some changes, then save it back to the file. But oh no! Now the chunk you just modified takes up TWO 4KiB blocks! So what happened to the old block? It got abandoned. It now exists as a gaping hole in the region file, waiting to be filled by your bits. Your new allocation now exists at the end of the file because it didn't have any space to put it inside the file. Now that there is a hole with a size of one block, it will be impossible for that hole to be reclaimed by the `SectorManager` due to the algorithm it uses. You see, I wanted to write the memory management algorithm in such a way that reallocation would be really fast. That means that if a chunk doesn't change size, it doesn't change location. If a chunk changes size, it will create holes in the file. Now, you may be wondering: Now what do we do with all these holes? We need to fill them with something! But the problem is that the algorithm will never reclaim the small holes. It may reclaim some larger holes, but the algorithm doesn't allow for the reclamation of smaller holes.

##### Solutions

One solution is to optimize the file every once in a while. Once it reaches a certain point of fragmentation, you can move data around in the file to make it the appropriate size. But that brings in the question of when to optimize the file. Should it be an automated process that occurs as a result of the file becoming too unoptimized? That may not be ideal. A more ideal solution may be to simply attempt to reclaim the holes at any chance that exists. The way this can be achieved is by reclaiming sectors that are lower than the one being freed so that the freed sectors tend towards the end of the file. This would require having the sectors sorted in some capacity. Hmm. Yes, it's a fairly difficult problem to pick a solution for. I like the idea of reallocating to a sector that is closer to the beginning of the file. I think that will help to keep the file less fragmented. On top of that, I could opt to allocate into a lower sector when a sector is reduced in size. But I'll have to do a little experimentation in order to determine the best course of action. I already did a little test to determine that the majority of all Minecraft chunks will be 1 or 2 4KiB blocks in size, so I don't have to worry about reallocations so often. It own't be a real issue. Most chunks will only be 1 4KiB block, and that means it will be reallocated to itself if it doesn't change size. It will be more rare for chunks to be more than 1 block, so I think that the approach of reallocating into lower blocks isn't really optimal. I think that it would be more ideal to keep track of how much empty space is in the file and then optmize it once it goes beyond that bound. I could also develop an algorithm to measure the complexity of optimization so that I can only optimize once the complexity goes beyond a certain bound.

### Conclusion

I'm going to have to do some investigation into the optimization. I'm working on a GUI based visualizer that I can use to manually move sectors around to try to come up with a good algorithm or something. I find that when I'm able to visually move pieces of a program around, it's easier to solve the given problem.